A lot of people building software today never took the traditional computer science path.
They arrived through curiosity, or a job that needed automating, or a late-night itch that
made something work. This week, David Kopech joins me to talk about computer science for
exactly these folks, the ones who learned to program first and are now ready to understand
the deeper ideas that power the tools they use every day. This is Talk Python To Me,
episode 529, recorded October 26, 2025.
Welcome to Talk Python To Me, the number one Python podcast for developers and data scientists.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy. I'm a PSF fellow who's been coding for over 25 years.
Let's connect on social media.
You'll find me and Talk Python on Mastodon, Bluesky, and X.
The social links are all in your show notes.
You can find over 10 years of past episodes at talkpython.fm.
And if you want to be part of the show, you can join our recording live streams.
That's right.
We live stream the raw uncut version of each episode on YouTube.
Just visit talkpython.fm/youtube to see the schedule of upcoming events.
Be sure to subscribe there and press the bell so you'll get notified anytime we're recording.
This episode is brought to you by Sentry.
Don't let those errors go unnoticed.
Use Sentry like we do here at Talk Python.
Sign up at talkpython.fm/sentry.
And it's brought to you by NordStellar.
NordStellar is a threat exposure management platform
from the Nord security family,
the folks behind NordVPN,
that combines dark web intelligence,
session hijacking prevention,
brand and domain abuse detection,
and external attack surface management.
Learn more and get started keeping your team safe
at talkpython.fm/Nordstellar.
David, welcome back to Talk Bythonomy.
Thank you so much for having me back, Michael.
It's really an honor.
Got some really fun stuff to talk about,
computer science from scratch.
What does that even mean?
We're going to find out
because you wrote the book on it.
Yeah, I'm excited.
And this book just came out,
so it's kind of fresh off the press.
And I want to thank you
for being the technical reviewer
on the book, actually.
Yeah, it was really fun.
You reached out and asked me,
and I don't normally do things like that,
but I'm like, you know,
that'd be kind of fun. It would be a good experience. And I do think it was. It taught
me some about creating books and I guess that pays off as well. And congratulations, by the way,
on Talk Python in production coming out. Yeah, thanks. I started that last December and it came
out, I think the beginning of this month, maybe end of September, something like that, but pretty
recently. So yeah, I really appreciate it. It's going really well. We're in kind of the same phase
because computer science from scratch officially came out end of September also. So we're just in
this kind of, you know, one month out from these books coming out. And so it's both, I think it's
an exciting time for both of us. And I've started reading Talk Python in production, and I'm really
loving it. So congrats on it. Awesome. Thank you. And I really enjoyed your book. And I had to read
it with a little more detail than just appreciate it, right? I had to like take notes and help you
with some feedback. So that was a really cool experience. And thanks. You know, it's been six,
almost a little, it's over five years, let's put it that way. It's been over five years since you've
on the show, we talked about classic computer science programs in Python, I believe it was.
And yeah, that was really a fun and popular episode. But let's do a quick refresher,
a quick introduction for you to everyone who's new to the show in the last five years.
Okay. So I'm a computer. My name is David Kopech. I'm a computer science professor
at Albright College in Redding, Pennsylvania. Actually just moved over here from Champlain
College, where I was for the past nine years in a similar role. And I'm also the program director
of Computer Science and Information Technology. We're launching three new majors, a little plug
for Albright, a revamped computer science major, an artificial intelligence major, and cybersecurity.
And so I'm managing the launch of those for fall 2026. My background is for the past decade,
obviously, as a computer science educator. I've written five books on computer science and
programming, the most successful of which was Classic Computer Science, Problems in Python,
which of course I was on the show five years ago about. And this book, Computer Science from Scratch,
is kind of for a similar audience. Both books are for Python programmers, folks who are intermediate
or advanced Python programmers, but maybe who want to fill in the kind of computer science topics
that they don't know, maybe because they're self-educated. Maybe they learned Python on
their own. They didn't have a formal CS degree, or maybe they did have a formal CS degree,
but now they're preparing for interviews or transitioning to a more CS in-depth role.
And they want to refresh on some of these topics.
So both books are for folks who know Python, but want to go deeper on CS.
Right. They're not, here's how you do a loop in Python, or here's what InterTools is.
It's true computer science topics, right?
Right. And I think somebody at that stage will be very frustrated by the books.
They really are. And so we have to put that preface in.
And they really are for intermediate or advanced Python programmers.
So, you know, so I'm trying to reach the same audience, but they're totally different books
in terms of the type of topics they cover.
So classic computer science problems in Python was more of a data structures and algorithms
type of book, did some AI type topics as well, but very much on the algorithm side.
Computer science from scratch is more, let's build up the layers of the software stack from
the bottom up that Python kind of runs on top of. So you understand what's actually happening under
the hood. So how does an interpreter work? What's the hardware software interface like? We get that
with emulators. And then there is still some algorithmic stuff as well, different topics than
in the prior book, but stuff like a little computer art stuff, a little bit of machine learning. So
we try, it's still a survey book. It's still pretty broad, but it's more about the layers of
the software stack than classic computer science problems in Python was. Yeah. And there's some
pretty low-level stuff and it's interesting you're doing in python you know a lot of i think a lot of
times that would be taught in um at least a pointer based language you know like c or even c c being
taught in assembly like you're talking to the machine like literally absolutely and you know
if you took these classes like if you took an um architecture class which i'm going to be teaching
next semester at albright it's going to be an assembly language right and if you took a compilers
course, it's usually in something like C or today it might be in a Rust, a low level language where
you do have that direct access to memory. But I wanted to make the book accessible. And Python is
the most accessible language in the world. It's the most popular language in the world. And it's
the language that we're increasingly using in computer science education anyway. So it is
actually a little unusual to cover some of these topics in Python, but it makes the topics accessible
to a much wider audience.
It definitely makes it accessible to a wider audience.
Let's take a step back and talk about this role you have
in this new college, university you're at.
You said that you're revamping the CS program.
You're adding AI and cybersecurity.
That's a big shift.
Do you want to just talk to people about how that's changing,
why you decided to change?
I look at a lot of CS programs,
and I don't know how connected they are to the real world.
So imagine some of these changes are to sort of realign it with what's happened recently.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
So I'm coming from a college, the Champlain College in Vermont, where I was at for nine
years, which was a professionally focused college.
So it was a college where we were preparing students for their careers.
I moved now to Albright, which is a liberal arts college.
So it's a college that's more teaching people how to think, creating great citizens.
And hopefully we prepare them for their careers very well, too.
but there's that liberal arts foundation underneath everything.
So one of the challenges in developing these three new majors
was how do you fit them into a liberal arts curriculum?
And how do you make them relevant to careers
while still being true to the liberal arts?
And so what I found the best way to do it
is to still focus on how to help people think computationally.
And so there's a firm foundation of computer science
and mathematics throughout all three majors.
So whether you're doing cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, or computer science,
you're going to have a lot of classes in common with one another. And we also need to infuse some
of the issues we see in the workforce today. Like all of them will have a computer ethics course
that's incorporated. And all of them will have an internship course that's incorporated. So
students are getting real world experience as they're going through these majors.
I think that's a great idea. It's really important to have done software engineering
hands-on with other companies, real products, and real product managers,
in addition to just knowing the algorithms and foundations.
Absolutely. I couldn't agree more. And so we're trying to blend the two. And that's been one of
the exciting things. And you asked why I changed. I was excited about this opportunity to build these
new majors from the ground up. We'll be one of the first teaching colleges, small teaching colleges,
to offer an artificial intelligence major. It's just been in the last five years that we've seen
colleges start to offer an undergraduate major in artificial intelligence. And it's mostly been
big name brand colleges like CMU that are offering these first artificial intelligence bachelor's
degrees. But we get to be at the forefront of how do you fit that into a small liberal arts college
and still make it career relevant and still have that firm liberal arts foundation.
Are you concerned about letting all these hackers in on your network if you're teaching a cybersecurity?
Well, I won't be teaching the cybersecurity courses. So I'm firmly just in the computer
science education course, and we're hiring additional faculty in cybersecurity and in
artificial intelligence. I'm more on the management side of those two programs. But, you know, look,
it's more relevant than ever. When you look at actually the number of students going to college
for cybersecurity, it's been exploding over the last decade. You know, I just talked about how
artificial intelligence has just come about as a bachelor's degree. Cybersecurity was kind of there
15 years ago. So cybersecurity started out as maybe you took a computer security course at the
end of your computer science degree. Then it became a concentration you could do within some
computer science degrees. And then in the 2010s, it broke out and became its own bachelor's degree.
And so we're seeing the same thing right now with AI. It started out, you know, when you did
undergrad computer science, maybe in the 90s, or like me and the OOs, you might have one course,
like an intro to AI course that you have at the end of your bachelor's degree. Then it started to
be something where you do a concentration at Champlain. I developed a concentration in
artificial intelligence. Now, just in the last five years, we're seeing it break out from being
just a part of a CS degree to being its whole own, you know, adjacent degree. So I think it's an
exciting time for that. Of course, there's a hype cycle right now about AI. So a lot of colleges
are jumping in and I think some of them are doing it the right way. And, you know, having that firm
foundation in computer science and mathematics, so it's durable. And some of them are doing it in
kind of a shallow way. We're trying to do it the right way. Yeah, that sounds great. And obviously
cybersecurity is one of those things that's highly valuable. Nobody wants to be in the news
for that reason, right? So companies are certainly looking for people with those skills.
Let's talk one more thing about the university and not the AI focus, but just AI. One of the
things I think is of all the places that's getting the most scrambled, changed, under pressure,
whatever you call it, from AI, I think it's education in general. And I'm not talking just
college. I'm talking, I don't know, like third grade. As soon as the kids can start using AI,
they're like, this is like the calculator with a rocket booster on it. You know what I mean? Like
this will solve the problems. And I think there's a really big challenge for you as universities to
connect with students, keep academic integrity as well. But there's also a huge problem, I think,
for the students to not let it undercut their education and end up going, well, all I know
to do is to do ChatGPT. You're absolutely right. I mean, it's a huge challenge in computer science
education. And I don't think the computer science education community has yet completely figured it
out. Well, basically what it breaks down to is exactly what you said. Students are just using
ChatGPT or GitHub Copilot to do their homework. And if you're in a first year or second year class,
I've been mostly teaching upper level CS for the past like six plus years. And I'm teaching an
intro class for the first time in a long time this semester. And it's been eye-opening for me
to see how many students are trying to just do every assignment with ChatGPT. And we still have
to give them basic assignments. When you're first learning how to do a for loop or what a function
is or what an if statement is even, right? You got to write some of those things.
You can't say implement a database and get back to me next week. You got to start somewhere.
So we still have to teach these fundamentals, but we have this opponent to us in some sense
of this ease of access to something that can just do all the work for you. And so I'm sure that,
you know, like you mentioned, mathematics educators had similar challenges in the 1970s,
1980s as calculators became prominent. So what I've done and I've been adjusting as since chat
GPT came out in fall 2022, I've been constantly adjusting and reevaluating, but I have had to go
back to the future a little bit and people might find this a little anachronistic, but I've heard
about it from other CS educators as well, going back to doing some paper exams. I know that sounds
crazy and I know that sounds like bizarre, but at some point you need to evaluate if students
actually know how to write a for loop because, you know, while we think, some people think LLMs are
going to replace software engineers in the next two years, you still need to understand what it's
outputting. And I don't think it's, I don't know about you, Michael, but I don't think they're
completely replacing software engineers in the next couple of years. And that's coming, I don't
know how many people maybe don't necessarily. I'm a huge fan of agentic coding and what it can do
for productivity. And it's incredibly powerful, but it's one of those things that it needs someone to
guide it who knows how to do that. And then it becomes a superpower. If you don't, you end up
with like, how do we end up on React? I thought this was a Rust project. You're like, what happened
here? Yeah. And you need to understand when it makes mistakes, you need to know how to correct
those mistakes. And of course, you need to be understanding everything that it's outputting,
so you're auditing it. This portion of Talk Python To Me is brought to you by Sentry's Seer.
I'm excited to share a new tool from Sentry, Seer. Seer is your AI-driven pair programmer that finds,
diagnoses, and fixes code issues in your Python app faster than ever. If you're already using
Sentry, you are already using Sentry, right? Then using Seer is as simple as enabling a feature on
your already existing project. Seer taps into all the rich context Sentry has about an error.
Stack traces, logs, commit history, performance data, essentially everything. Then it employs its
agentic AI code capabilities to figure out what is wrong. It's like having a senior developer
pair programming with you on bug fixes. Seer then proposes a solution, generating a patch for your
code and even opening a GitHub pull request. This leaves the developers in charge because it's up to
them to actually approve the PR. But it can reduce the time from error detection to fix dramatically.
Developers who've tried it found it can fix errors in one shot that would have taken them
hours to debug. SEER boasts a 94.5% accuracy in identifying root causes. SEER also prioritizes
actionable issues with an actionability score, so you know what to fix first. This transforms
Sentry errors into actionable fixes, turning a pile of error reports into an ordered to-do list.
If you could use an always-on-call AI agent to help track down errors and propose fixes before
you even have time to read the notification, check out Sentry's Seer. Just visit talkpython.fm
slash Seer, S-E-E-R. The link is in your podcast player's show notes.
be sure to use our code talkpython one word all caps thank you dysentery for supporting talk
pythonomy so we are having a real challenge especially in those intro classes of how do you
kind of force students to not use these tools essentially because you're not learning anything
if the tool writes the for loop for you when you're first learning how to do a for loop and so you have
to find ways to to encourage it to to win hearts and minds i think of course that's a big part of it
is convincing students and being dynamic and enthusiastic about how good it feels to really
understand how this actually works. But then there has to be enforcement too. And sometimes that feels
a little anachronistic being forceful about it or going back to doing tests on paper. But we have to
have ways of ensuring the knowledge is actually there. I feel like this is not just a college
student issue, but I think it's especially relevant in that part of your career that the struggle is
not in the way. The struggle is often part of what unlocks your thinking. It's part of what
cements the knowledge and makes you feel a true sense of accomplishment. When you're like,
I tried this and I couldn't get it to work. But three hours later, I finally figured it out. And
I now understand iterators. Finally. You know what I mean? And it's just so easy to push the easy
button and just say, chat, why? Yeah. You know? And that's what feels good about being a teacher
is being there for those aha moments with students.
I had some moments like that last week
and they reminded me,
this is why you're in this career.
It's really something that can become addictive
to students actually.
When they start having those aha moments,
they want more of them and it spurs on.
That's how you end up at like 3 a.m.
really hungry,
wondering why you haven't gone to sleep
but still programming.
You're like, this is amazing, I can't stop.
Right, right, right.
And it takes a certain mindset to be able to appreciate those moments.
And, you know, this is like a sidebar, but one thing we're also seeing in computer science education is we see a lot of folks who go into it sometimes for the wrong reasons.
Folks sometimes go into computer science just because they hear, this is a great way to get a good job.
And if that's your only motivation going into it, you're probably not going to be successful in it, unfortunately.
It's going to be tough. Yeah, it's going to be tough.
But a lot of people are there for the right reasons. So I think that that's good.
Absolutely. And I hope with a book like this, folks who came in from the other side,
folks who came in because they had that interest, but they didn't have the chance to either go to
university, maybe they couldn't afford it, maybe they studied something else and they're later in
their career. This will hopefully give them a bunch of those aha moments and about topics that
are deeper than just how to write a for loop. Yeah, absolutely. Well, good. I mean, I feel like
there's probably some middle ground you might be able to accomplish if you're like, all right,
we're going to give you a laptop, a testing laptop that has no internet. Like we've gone in there and
crushed the network card. Yeah. Here, take the test. And here's your thumb drive to submit your
work and potentially, you know, potentially. Yeah. Yeah. And when we do stuff like that,
like I just did a test on, you know, an online test for my students and I'm just monitoring to
make sure nobody's using the tools. You know, but there is something said still for paper exams.
I'll tell you why. Sometimes even today on today's tools for giving exams, sometimes you want students
to draw something, especially if it's a data structures and algorithms class, you might want
them to draw a tree and it's just actually easier for them to do that on paper. So when people hear
paper, they might be like, oh my goodness, what are you doing that for? No, there's real reasons.
Yeah, of course. But yeah, we have monitoring tools too. Yeah, very good. All right. Let's maybe
take a couple of different examples or different chapters in the book and talk through them.
The first one, the first main topic is the smallest possible programming language, right?
Yes, yes.
Tell us about this.
Yeah, the premise of the chapter is what's the minimum that we need to have a programming language?
And there's a famous programming language.
I'm actually not going to use the name of the language on the show, I think, just because it has the F word in it.
And I didn't make up the name of the language.
It was developed 30 years ago, but we'll just call it BF, okay?
Yeah.
Brain F star.
Yeah, sure.
or in AppStar. This language, it only has eight symbols in it. I mean, it literally only has eight
symbols in it, yet it's what we call Turing complete. And I'm not going to, I won't go into
the full details of what it means for something to be Turing complete, but let me put it this way.
A language that is Turing complete can theoretically solve any of the same algorithmic
problems as any other language that's Turing complete. And every programming language that
you use is Turing complete, whether it's Java, Python, C, whatever, of course, they're all
Turing complete. This language with only eight symbols in it is also Turing complete. So while
you could code something like Quicksort in Python, you could also code it in BF with just eight
symbols. While you could code a JSON parser in Python, you could also code a JSON parser in BF.
So by learning this really, really basic language and actually implementing it,
so implementing an interpreter for it, something that can actually run programs written in it,
you really get to understand just how little we need to solve computational problems.
We don't need much.
We need very minimum amount of computing machinery and very minimum amount of syntax to be able to solve most problems.
Now, would you want to solve most problems in PF?
Of course not.
We just use it as an illustrative example to show this is how simple a programming language can really be
and still have all the same capabilities as a more advanced programming language.
And you might wonder then why do we have such much more advanced programming languages?
Because they give us a lot more developer productivity.
They have more abstractions that let us think as human beings instead of thinking like machines.
The expressiveness, absolutely.
And so that's great that we have all of that.
But if you really want to understand essentially what the language is doing at the lowest levels, you only need these few bits.
So what's the key message here?
Obviously, you're not trying to get people to become BF experts, right?
I mean, maybe learn Cobalt over BF these days.
It could work for the Social Security Administration.
Yes, exactly.
There's going to be some high-paying Cobalt jobs out there.
But this is more about writing an actual interpreter, very much like CPython itself, in a sense, conceptually.
Conceptually.
I mean, much, much, much simpler.
And actually, in the next chapter, we get to writing a basic interpreter, which is just one step up from BF.
And we can talk about that in a minute.
But yeah, it's about understanding how it works at a low level.
Like what's it actually doing?
And, you know, it feels good to make something that can run programs.
A lot of people, when they get into computer science, are actually excited about like making their own language.
So by doing these first couple of chapters of the book, you're actually on the path to that.
I think after reading these first two chapters, you could go implement your own simple language and really make that kind of dream that a lot of us have come true.
So it's about understanding how it works at a low level.
I have to say the book is not a practical book.
It's not like talk Python in production
where you're going to learn,
you know, here's some useful tools
and tips and strategies.
Install this thing and set up that config
and then run it this way.
To do something right now.
Right.
Computer Science from Scratch
is not going to help you build your next app
like that you're building.
Not directly.
Not directly,
but it is going to help you understand
a lot more about what's happening
under the covers,
which is ultimately going to make you think
more broadly as a software developer
and understand different strategies that you might be able to use.
I'll give you an example with this interpreter stuff.
You might be writing a program that needs to have some kind of configuration files,
and you want to maybe be able to parse those configuration files.
Well, part of writing an interpreter is writing a parser,
something that understands the syntax of the programming languages
and starts to get towards the semantics.
And you might want to be able to write a parser later on
for some very specific configuration type format that you've come up with
for some, or maybe even just a file format for more of like an office type program.
And you're going to need some way of understanding the techniques of how to parse that. Learning how
an interpreter works will help you write that program later on. So it's about learning computational
techniques, learning problem solving techniques more than it is about like something that's going to
necessarily be, this is exactly how you do this for the next app you're going to build.
It's not something that you would just stumble across most of the time, I think, right? You'll
across, you know, oh, here's an ML library or something, but you don't typically stumble across
and here's how you build a parser from scratch. Right. And so, you know, there has to be that
curiosity there. So I will admit that, you know, if you have no interest and you're not the type
of person who wants to understand how things work, you won't like this book. And you know,
that is some folks and that's okay. There's folks who go into programming because they're only
interested in what they can build and they're not so interested in how things work. And if that's
you, this is probably not the book for you. But if you're the type of person who has that curiosity
and you really want to understand how everything's actually working under the covers, then this is a
great book. Yeah, absolutely. And it's a simple enough thing that you can grasp the ideas pretty
quickly with this BF language, right? It's not so complicated that you, you know, a day later,
still trying to make the thing parse. Absolutely. I mean, what's crazy is to interpret BF,
you only need about 30 lines of code, 30 lines of Python.
And then you actually have something that can run any program written in this language.
And to be clear, you have like something.bf files that you can put the language into,
and then you say Python, this module, that file,
and it'll run it as if it were an interpreter for that thing, right?
Exactly. Yeah.
You're literally implementing the whole programming language in like 30 lines of Python.
And I think what's great about this too,
is it takes away the feeling that everything is magic.
That's another thing I love when people read
also class computer science problems in Python
is sometimes when you think about how these things work,
like in that book, we cover the A-star algorithm,
which is something that Google Maps work uses.
When you think about Google Maps,
it feels like magic when you use it.
But actually there's really understandable,
logical algorithms that are underneath the surface.
It's the same thing here.
Python itself might feel like magic to a lot of folks.
But by the time you get through these first couple chapters, especially through the basic interpreter chapter, you'll start to be on the road to think, oh, you know what?
I bet I could dive into the CPython source code with enough additional training and really understand it.
It gives you that confidence that this is not just magic.
You just got to look at the byte codes and look at it go.
Yeah.
Not to say there's not a lot more there, but it just gets you on that journey and makes you see it's not magic.
Right.
Well, it's that zero to one sort of gap that's the hardest to cross.
Yeah.
You know, like the second language, second programming language you learn or the third
or the fourth, they only get easier to learn, not harder to learn.
Whereas, you know, maybe when you're first starting out and you're trying to get something
to compile and it won't even run, you're like, oh my God, how am I going to do?
I can't even learn this one.
There's all these things I'm going to have to know.
And it's really kind of upside down.
Yeah, absolutely.
And so, you know, when we think about understanding how Python itself works, I think the second
chapter of the book about basic gets us, you know, a lot further along on that journey.
because here this isn't just a made up.
BF is, it's a language that's been around
in computer science education for like 30 years,
but it's not a real language that people actually used.
And the second factor-
Very few people ever said that they were BF programmers
at a dinner party, right?
Absolutely.
But plenty of people said they were basic programmers.
And it was the first programming language
of a lot of people who grew up in the 70s, 80s,
or even the 90s.
It was my first programming language.
And there was a dialect of basic called tiny basic
that came out in the late 1970s.
it was actually one of the first free software projects. And it would run on machines that just
had two or four kilobytes of RAM. So that's why it was called Tiny Basic. I mean, it truly was
tiny. And so we re-implement a dialect of Tiny Basic in chapter two. So this is re-implementing
a real programming language that people actually used for real work in the late 1970s and up to the
early 1980s. And it can run real programs from that period. So you could go download a program
from the late 70s, we were missing like one or two features from the real language.
But if you have a pro, not all programs use all those features, you could actually run
it in this interpreter.
So we go from the first language where it's really esoteric, educational, you know, weird
language to the second chapter.
This was a real thing.
Yeah, absolutely.
It was, you know, I'm just going to give a little shout out to Visual Basic.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Did you ever do Visual Basic?
I did.
And I did a version on the Mac called Real Basic.
So this is really esoteric.
But anyone who used real basic, late 90s, I'm in your camp.
There you go.
I don't know if we even today still have something as approachable and productive as Visual Basic was.
For people who haven't used it, you're like, there's just no way.
There's no way that it's basic.
But you would just get a visual thing.
You would drag it together to build your, you know, here, I want to have, literally, you would drag over.
Here's a web browser.
Here's the address bar.
Here's a go button.
And then you would double click the go button and would create an event handler.
and then you would go webbrowser.gototext.value or whatever.
I mean, that was literally, you could do it in five minutes.
You could like create something
that is a functional web browser without much.
It was incredible.
And so, yeah, I'm just thinking back
to a few things I've built with it.
It was amazing.
You know, Michael, a lot of people agree with you.
There's a lot of articles that I've seen on blogs and stuff
where people reminisce about Visual Basic.
And I agree.
I mean, for desktop app development,
it was incredibly productive.
I mean, I think it still rivals some of the tools we have for building web apps today.
When you think about how easy it was to lay out a user interface.
And for designers, it was great too, because designers didn't need to know how to code.
And they could lay out the interface in the same way that it would really appear in the program,
which is different from how designers work today, where they'll often do mock-ups.
And the developer will have to take the mock-up and turn it into code.
And so you kind of lose something there with the designer being able to have the final product
in front of them as they're changing around how things look.
So there were elements of it
that were still missing today, I think.
- Yeah, I think it really hasn't been matched.
Windows forms from.NET kind of approached that,
but it was still, itself was also
a little bit more complicated.
There was something special about that.
And now, don't get me wrong,
it's not like I'm saying we should just go back to it
because the software we build is way more advanced,
does a lot of other things,
but there's just that lower area is just kind of missing.
This portion of Talk Python To Me is brought to you by NordStellar.
NordStellar is a threat exposure management platform from the Nord security family,
the folks behind NordVPN that combines dark web intelligence,
session hijacking prevention, brand abuse detection,
and external attack service management.
Keeping your team and your company secure is a daunting challenge.
That's why you need NordStellar on your side.
It's a comprehensive set of services, monitoring, and alerts
to limit your exposure to breaches and attacks
and act instantly if something does happen.
Here's how it works.
Nordstellar detects compromised employee
and consumer credentials.
It detects stolen authentication cookies
found in InfoStealer logs and dark web sources
and flags compromised devices,
reducing MFA bypass ATOs without extra code in your app.
Nordstellar scans the dark web
for cyber threats targeting your company.
It monitors forums, markets, ransomware blogs, and over 25,000 cybercrime telegram channels
with alerting and searchable contexts you can route to Slack or your IRR tool.
Nordstellar adds brand and domain protection.
It detects cyber squats and lookalikes via visual, content similarity, and search transparency logs,
plus broader brand abuse takedowns across the web, social, and app stores to cut the phishing risk for your users.
They don't just alert you about impersonation.
they file and manage the removals.
Finally, NordStellar is developer-friendly.
It's available as a platform and an API.
No agents to install.
If security is important to you and your organization,
check out NordStellar.
Visit talkpython.fm/nordstellar.
The link is in your podcast player's show notes
and on the episode page.
Please use our link, talkpython.fm/nordstellar,
so that they know that you heard about their service from us.
And you know what time of year it is.
It's late fall.
That means Black Friday is in play as well.
So the folks at Nord Stellar gave us a coupon, BlackFriday20.
That's Black Friday, all one word, all caps, 20, two, zero.
That grants you 20% off.
So if you're going to sign up for them soon,
go ahead and use BlackFriday20 as a code,
and you might as well save 20%.
It's good until December 10th, 2025.
Thank you to the whole Nord security team
for supporting Talk Python To Me.
And I want to talk,
sort of transition from that to something else really.
We're looking at these two examples of the BF language interpreter and the basic interpreter.
I hear that to really understand computer science, really to work on these things, I have to.
I don't, it's not preferable.
I have to do a language with pointers, malloc, free.
I've got to.
I've got to work at that level.
I just won't understand anything.
And Python, we don't really have those concepts.
And the irony, I think, is Python has more pointers than C++ because there's like no stack at all.
Not at all.
Really?
I mean, in the interpreter there is, but not in your writing. Even a number one is just a pointer.
So Python's full of pointers, but not in the way that computer science thinks about it.
What are your thoughts about that sort of tension? On one hand, you have this really
understandable language talking about these ideas, but the computer is calling malloc on a page of
memory and that's what's happening and they're not seeing it. Okay. So let me talk about it from a
pedagogy standpoint. So at my last institution, Champlain College, we had a big debate over my
nine years there. Should we do our first three classes in Python or in C++? And when I came in,
the first three classes were in C++. And we actually decided over the years to keep it there
for exactly what you mentioned. We wanted to give students both that high level experience with
object-oriented programming, but we also wanted them to have experience with pointers, with memory
management, and understand how things work at a low level. But in that same period of time, many
schools have moved to Python because of the other thing we talked about, which is accessibility.
I think Python simply is an easier language to learn than C++. I don't think that most people
who know both languages would really debate that. And so if we're trying to make those first ramp
up classes where you're first learning CS as easy as possible, I think Python is the way to go if
we want to encourage more people into the discipline. That doesn't mean there shouldn't
Maybe a C or C++ course later on where folks, maybe when they take operating systems or even as part of an architecture class to see how the assembly language matches to a C program, that kind of thing.
You know, it doesn't mean there shouldn't be C or C++ in the curriculum or Rust or whatever.
But if we're thinking about what's best for a student who's just coming into the field, I think we need to think about accessibility.
But at the same time, my advice to all students is learn one language well before you learn any other language.
So whether you're starting with Python or you're starting with C++, spend a year or two on it and become really decent at it before you go and learn another language.
And that's the biggest mistake I see folks who are self-taught make.
The biggest mistake I see folks who are self-taught make is constantly switch around from language to language.
I need to know this.
Okay, I got it.
Now it's time to learn this.
And they're trying to fill all these gaps, right?
Right, right.
Because once you learn Python well, a lot of the stuff in C or C++ will make sense to you.
The pointers might not, but a lot of the other stuff, like how does a function work?
How does a loop work?
What are variables?
What's a global versus local?
All that kind of stuff.
That's going to make sense to you.
And that's going to be transferable skills once you've really learned it in any one language
across any other language.
And then pointers, you can learn later on.
You don't need to learn that at the beginning of your CS education.
People make it sound like it's a totally mystical topic.
If you are able to do calculus, which basically every CS degree requires calculus one, you can learn pointers.
You'll be okay.
You can learn pointers.
Yeah, exactly.
Like double integrals and all that kind of stuff is way worse.
I feel like you could also cycle, right?
So you could start with Python for a couple of classes, then go deeper, closer to the machine with C.
But then you could come back and say, let's look at Python again with new eyes and try to understand interpreted dynamic languages better.
because now you can take the red pill
and you can see the arenas
and the blocks of the memory allocator
and the GC and all that kind of stuff, right?
You could go, actually,
you didn't know any of this stuff.
You didn't, nobody probably even thought
to think is this here
and yet look at what's underneath
that you're taking,
you're building on top of, right?
Yeah, and also remember how long
an academic semester is.
It's 15 weeks.
So if you're taking a class in college,
you're forced to be doing that same language
for 15 weeks. That's really the challenge for self-taught folks is they could just spend two
days on one, two days on another, right? But absolutely, you're right. Once you've had enough
time in one, you can cycle to the others back and forth. Yeah, fun. I personally am a fan of
it being in Python because I feel like one of the biggest challenges to keeping people in computer
science and programming is that they don't get enough early wins and early like, yes, aha, right?
It's like, okay, in week 12, we'll let you write a program, but we're going to talk pointers for a while.
And then you'll finally get to make some, you know what I mean?
Like it's just so delayed and that's fine for certain people, but there's a lot of people are like, oh, forget this.
This is not what I thought.
I'm out.
And a huge part of that is the Python library ecosystem.
How easy it is to drop Pygame into an intro class and get somebody building a really simple game.
You know, it's much harder in C or C++ to start integrating libraries and start having students understand how to use those libraries.
And it usually requires a lot more knowledge buildup to be able to use pointers and stuff with those libraries.
So Python just makes everything more accessible.
Awesome.
Cool.
All right.
The next area that was pretty interesting and a little bit, maybe a little artsy.
Yeah.
Is the computational art.
Tell us about that.
Yeah. So there's two chapters in the book on computational art. The first one is really
starting to understand what a pixel is on the screen. And the way we do that is we take modern
photos and then we want to display them on like an ancient Mac, a Mac from the 1980s,
like the Mac Plus. And so we're going to take that modern photo and use what's called a dithering
algorithm to break it down into patterns of black and white pixels because those early Macs were
only black and white, that will then still kind of look like the photo in black and white with
these specialized patterns. So you're learning a bunch of things by doing this. One thing you're
learning is you're learning really what is a pixel. And a pixel is really pretty simple at its base.
I mean, it's just a color and a location. And so understanding how those pixels are organized
and really they're just organized usually as an array or, you know, as a list in Python or a
numpy array or whatever. And then we're understanding some algorithmic stuff. So
is giving us some algorithmic practice.
And then a cool thing we do at the end
is we actually convert it into a file format
called Mac Paint for displaying on an ancient Mac.
And that Mac Paint format uses
a very simple compression scheme
called run length encoding.
So we're getting some other kind of algorithmic practice
in there as well,
understanding a simple compression algorithm.
And we're understanding something about file formats too,
which is really kind of an interesting CS topic as well.
Yeah, it sure is, yeah.
to properly format the file so the Mac Paint program on the ancient Mac will open it correctly.
So yeah, that was something actually when I first got into programming, I feel like I just stuck
with text oriented files pretty much as long as I could. Because, you know, looking at a binary file,
like, okay, it has a header and we read the first few bytes and then the value of that byte tells
you how long the rest of the header is and then like what this means. And then you skip. And I
don't know. That was just, it was a bridge too far for me in my early programming days. And I was
like, wow, this is intense. And I was in awe of people like, yeah, we just read the header and we
do this. I'm like, okay, if you say so. You know, it's a classic CS trade-off between time and space.
Anything that we do in a binary file, we could do in a text file. But binary files can be more
efficient because they can be more compact and they can be faster to read from for certain kinds
of data. So, you know, it's not that we have to use binary files, but understanding what a binary
file format is like can be eye-opening to some readers. And if you think about like modern file
formats, of course, text formats are much more explainable, right? That's why we have the rise
of things like XML in the late nineties up to today, or even JSON as a data interchange format.
There's alternatives to JSON, of course, that are much more efficient for coding your web app in
for distributing the data back and forth. But JSON is human readable. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But JSON is
human readable. So we can right away understand what it's supposed to represent and debug it really
well. And so it's, you know, it's one of those classic trade-offs. We can have something more
efficient or we can have something that might take up a little bit more time, but actually,
you know, is better for us as human beings. Yeah. It's just, I think it's a good skill.
And also something that was prevalent throughout the book is juggling bits, bits and bytes, not just juggling bytes, but bits and bit flipping and shifting.
And there's a lot of that going on, especially in the emulator layers and stuff like that.
Yeah. And even in the Mac paint chapter, because the way Mac paint stores pixels is as individual bits.
So you have like a one or a zero representing a black or a white pixel on the screen.
And so you have to find a way to take those bits and compact them into bytes and then run the right run length encoding algorithm compress it. It's yeah, but there's a lot of that. And, you know, when you do really low level work in computing, you need to understand bits and bytes.
If you're going to work on device drivers or operating systems or file formats, you really need to understand this stuff at an intimate level.
So we try to make fun projects in the book that you get something that's interesting as a way of making this a little of sugar to help the medicine go down kind of thing.
And we were talking about the computer graphics chapters.
I also wanted to mention chapter four because I love the program in that called Impressionist.
It makes images that look like an impressionist painter painted a photograph.
So you give it a photograph and then it builds kind of abstract art out of that photograph.
And people usually think you need a neural network for that or you need some kind of really advanced machine learning algorithm for that.
But actually, we show in the chapter that you can do it using a pretty simple algorithm.
All the algorithm does is it puts a vector shape on the screen and it tries to position the vector shape so that it overlaps a region of color on the original photo that is close to the color in the vector shape.
And if you keep doing that and you put enough vector shapes on the screen, you start to have like abstract shapes that look like the original photo.
And so I think that's that chapter is kind of powerful because it shows you how a simple technique, a simple computational technique can really have some pretty powerful output.
it. Yeah, it's a really interesting idea and it comes out looking great. It's sort of,
it's approaching the problem from a different perspective, which I suspect is probably a pretty
interesting CS lesson. You know, there's these problems that are incredibly expensive and
difficult to compute the one true answer, but then there's amazingly fast ways to get a,
that's pretty much it, answer. I'm thinking like Monte Carlo simulations and stuff like that.
You're like, this could take two weeks or three milliseconds, which would you prefer? You're
And, you know, that that's we talked about, like, why is the book in Python?
And, you know, that is one of the challenges of writing the book in Python is simply Python doesn't have great performance when you write in pure Python.
And so, you know, we've all seen the benchmarks where Python's like 50 or 70 times slower than C on certain benchmarks.
Right. And yeah, honestly, for some of the programs in this book, you really see that performance deficit you have with Python, like the abstract art chapter,
where if I wrote that same program in C using some C graphics library instead of in Python
with Pillow, even though Pillow, I think, is mostly implemented in C anyway, but still just
with the overhead of having our algorithmic part of it in Python, that program is probably 30,
50 times slower than it would be in C. So you have to wait like 20 minutes to see that abstract art
that would have been like less than a minute in a C program. Not that it's relevant to the book or
of the courses, but you probably could bring in some optimizations like Cython or Numba,
a couple of the things that'll take just the inner two loops and just make them go different,
but it's not the point of the book. That's true. And so I put that as an exercise for the reader
in the NES emulator chapter, because the NES emulator chapter where we actually build up
a real NES emulator. So I didn't write in the book for legal reasons, but it can actually play
Donkey Kong. So it can play Donkey Kong from the original Nintendo Entertainment System.
Let's talk about the NES, the Nintendo Entertainment System.
Yeah. So, I mean, the NES, a lot of us remember growing up with, and if you're of a younger
generation, this was like the main video game system of the 1980s to early 1990s that everyone
had. It's where the original Super Mario came out, the original Legend of Zelda. And, you know,
it's actually, of course, like all video game systems, it's a computer. And being a video game
system for the 1980s. It's a pretty simple computer, actually. It has a 6502 microprocessor,
which is the same microprocessor that was in the Apple II or the Commodore 64 or the TRS,
I think the TRS-80 also. And that microprocessor, it only has 56 instructions, the NES version of it.
And so you can write an interpreter for that microprocessor pretty compactly,
not quite as compact as the BF interpreter in chapter one, but compactly enough that it's only
lines of Python to be able to really write a simulator of that CPU. And so the NES is just
that CPU plus a graphics processor called the picture processing unit plus an audio processor.
So in the chapter, we implement the full CPU. We implement a simplified version of the PPU,
not advanced enough to run Super Mario Brothers, but it is advanced enough to run Donkey Kong.
And we don't implement the APU. So the audio processing unit is a little more complicated
We don't do the audio.
But we do all of this in the chapter
so you can run real NES games.
And what you're getting is you're getting to understand
that software hardware interface.
You're starting to understand how does our software
actually get run on hardware
by re-implementing what a CPU actually does.
And you're re-implementing the memory map too.
So how does a CPU connect to memory?
How does a CPU connect to the graphics processor?
You're doing all of that in that chapter.
And so it's kind of like-
Sure. You talked about like writing an interpreter for the BF in basic languages. Here you're
completely emulating the hardware of the NES and you're giving it the potentially given it
open source NES games and it can run them, right?
Correct. Yeah. It runs several NES open source games. Like I said, I didn't put it for legal
reasons, but it can run real commercial games as well for the NES. And so you're doing the whole
soup to nuts like entire system except the audio. But it is Python and it's pure Python, except for,
of course, the library we're using. We're using Pygame for displaying the window, which is written
a lot of in C. But because it's pure Python, the emulator doesn't run at full speed. So it runs on
my Mac. It runs at about 15 frames per second. The real NES ran at 60 frames per second. So we leave
as an exercise to the reader. Yeah, go use Cython or something like that. And I'm sure you can get
up with several different techniques,
not just with, definitely with Cython,
but with several different techniques,
you could get this up to 60 frames per second,
but you're going to have to incorporate
something that is, you know, using,
that gets outside of just pure Python.
Sure.
You know, one, there's a bunch of ways
that you already mentioned,
but one new way that's kind of officially new,
just this month is free-threaded Python.
And I've been doing,
I went back to my async programming course
where there's a lot of examples of like,
let's do this synchronously.
Now let's do it with threads.
Let's do it with multiprocessing.
Now let's do it with asyncio, right?
And see like how those all compare.
And the threads one, anything was computational.
It's like, yeah, it's the same speed
or maybe even slower, right?
But then I ran it with, I did uv run --Python
3.14 T and it went 10 times faster
or eight times faster on my 10 core machine.
And it's literally just running on the,
I didn't change the codes from pre-threaded Python
and it just took off.
So I'm thinking here there's graphics amongst many things is primed for this like embarrassingly parallel processing.
Yeah.
You could break up the screen into like little chunks and go, well, we got 10 chunks and 10 cores.
Let's go at it.
What do you think about it as a plausibility?
Unfortunately, for a lot of emulators, especially emulators that are for more modern systems, threading would be a huge advantage.
For the NES, it's not because of the way that everything was timed.
So every time that the CPU does one cycle, the PPU, the picture processing unit, has to be timed to do exactly three cycles.
So you can't just go ahead and, you know, and you don't just give it work.
It's not like a modern GPU where you just give it a bunch of chunks of work.
It works on its own and then provides that to the screen.
It's completely synchronized to the CPU.
And so is the audio processing unit, too.
So it all has to kind of be synchronized within a single thread.
And all the games assume that that's how it works, right?
That's how they have it all set.
Yeah.
And what they had, what was called a V blank period, which was a period where it had already
drawn the screen and then it actually tells the CPU, hey, I'm done drawing the screen.
Now you can do all kinds of work and be ready for the next time that you draw the next frame
again.
So they had really tight synchronization between the graphics and the CPU.
Interesting.
Still cool.
Still pretty cool.
There's a lot going on there.
If you want to understand hardware, that's a pretty low level look at it, right?
I think it's kind of the crown jewel of the book.
You know, there's a lot of people who are interested in emulators.
And what I found before writing the book is there's not a single book out there that talks
about writing an NES emulator, which is the most common emulator that people want to write.
So I think this is the first book that has a chapter on writing an NES emulator.
I will admit I was a little scared of like if Nintendo's legal team is going to like
be upset about the book or something like that.
but we did research on it.
I mean, everything we're doing is perfectly legal
in the book in the United States, at least.
So, you know, but anyway.
Scary, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
And we put a big disclaimer at the top of the chapter
as you remember reading.
I have a legal, I have a Nintendo story for you.
Great.
From when I was young.
And this was, I think this is very late 80s,
early 90s, last century.
Now, this was not me, someone I knew,
someone I was friends with had a,
I think it was a super NES.
Okay.
And people may not remember,
but they had these big honking cartridges go chonk.
And you would chunk them down in there.
You would turn on,
you would basically reboot the NES and it would boot up from the,
the big cartridge game cartridge you put in there.
And there was this guy that they've,
they found somehow I don't,
cause there's no internet.
Maybe it's through a BBS.
I don't know how this was found,
but they found this guy who built a thing that the,
bottom half of it looked like a game cartridge. The top was this whole computer that at the top of it,
it had a 3.5 inch floppy drive. Wow. So you would go to your BBS, you would find a game,
you would put it on a floppy, and then you would slot this huge extra computer down into the NES
and you would turn it on and it would like delegate the file IO through the little fake cartridge
back to it. And it worked like crazy. It was perfect. That guy was not in business for very
long the guy who sold them not my not my friend but the person he got it from wasn't available
after a while so this is so super nes comes out in like 91 um so this might have been a regular
no i wasn't i think i might have been in college so yeah it would be it would be 91 onward yeah
okay i mean that is 93 that is very advanced like for that time when you think about the type of
stuff people like were modding at that time that guy was a genius yeah he was he should have been
hired if he wasn't you know what i mean yeah yeah absolutely yeah he was building himself out of his
dorm room or something i don't know it was i think it was in uh manhattan in uh kansas state
university i'm not sure where the guy was but wow anyway yeah that guy was playing with fire
yeah absolutely and you know what um sometimes like understanding how the rom cartridge works
right like we think again that it's like all magic right but actually what those big cartridges that
we had, that we like inserted in the NES were is they were mostly plastic, like that did nothing.
And there was a little ROM chip, like inside the big hunk of plastic and the ROM chip,
ROM just stands for read only memory. So most of them were just like a big chunk of memory
with a very tiny bit of logic chips that were called mappers on the NES that said like,
read this memory at this time. But again, it wasn't really magic. And those cartridges look
so intimidating, but they were really just a big piece of memory. Yeah. Think about how much you've
got to make that work right before you ship it. Yeah. There's no patches. There's no download and
update. Once it's shipped, it's shipped and it's burned into the ROM and that's it.
I have some friends who work in game development and like before they even ship the 1.0,
nowadays they're working on the first patch, like, and they just know they're not going to ship like
the perfect program in 1.0. Now, to be fair, games were much simpler in the 1980s, right?
than they are today, but they had to be perfect, like literally had to be perfect. and so
there was a certain, I think different attitude around,  game development then, than there is
today. And remember they were also working in assembly language. so it was easy language
to work. I don't know if people like this word, but I would call it kind of hardcore,  writing
NES games in the 1980s. It was, you know, that kind of programming it's, it's just, it was just
different. It was just different. You had to be so detail oriented and you had to be so thorough.
It's almost like writing spaceship control software type of thing. Not quite, but almost.
And the machines were so slow. The NES, which we emulate in chapter six, ran on a 1.8 megahertz
CPU, 6502, 1.8 megahertz. So Super Mario was like an incredible accomplishment on a 1.8 megahertz.
So people had to worry about all these computer science topics in a way that they don't today as programmers, because you had to squeeze every last bit of algorithmic performance out of the machine.
And so today, I think we have sloppier software today because we have an embarrassment of riches.
We got such powerful computers with so much memory that people don't worry about writing things as efficiently as possible.
And so we end up with inefficient software sometimes because people don't bother to do the algorithms right.
Yes, but I'm going to put a little double dagger, like see the footnote by your comment.
Absolutely true for software, not necessarily true for software developers.
Agreed.
The efficiency of writing a 99.9% correct Python program, how quickly that gets done versus
like something in assembly language straight on a ROM.
Yep.
You know what I mean?
These are the, I think this is an interesting arc and maybe you could speak to it a little
bit from your academic perspective, but I think it's a really interesting arc of, it used to be
really hard to program and we'd solve small problems with lots of effort and it's getting
easier. And a lot of times it gets easier. People say, well, there it goes, job's over. There's not
going to be programmers anymore because everyone can do it. And we just solve bigger, more complex
problems. And that just keeps building, you know, like the, a web app, a basic e-commerce app from
today was a keynote presentation of how like a fortune 500 company pulled it off in 1990 you
know what i mean like yeah yeah here's how we got the ssl termination special machines to handle the
ssl decryption so that we could do this under two seconds of request i mean like crazy stuff yeah
what do you think about this well it's not an either or i mean we want developers to be productive
and we also want efficient software so i mean the good news is that means that after we have make it
it easier and easier to build software, we still need folks who are going to work on optimizing that
software after it's built. So there's still jobs for software developers who are interested in that.
I think you actually touched on this in talk Python in production to some degree, because you
talk about in the book, the appropriate level of complexity for the type of app that you're
building. And so you talk about like, you know, maybe you don't need a Kubernetes cluster if
you're just building, you know, something for 10 million requests a month and not something for a
million requests a month. And it's going to be run by one person or one person part-time versus a
team or somebody who's a DevOps expert, right? Right, right, right. So if I'm working on a run
of the mill e-commerce thing, maybe I don't worry about squeezing out every last bit of performance
because I want to productively make something that, like you said, is 99.9% of the way there
as quickly as possible. But if I'm building a 3D game, they still build most 3D games in C++
because they need to squeeze out every last bit of performance,
even if it's a little less efficient for the programmers.
The programmers could write the games faster,
maybe in another language or another framework
than they're using, whatever.
But they use something that squeezes out
every last bit of performance.
So I think you have to think about
what is the app that we're building?
What is the domain that we're in?
And it's also just not an either or.
Like, you know, we want to have software
that's both developer productive to build,
but also that's efficient to run.
And it's an ongoing process.
We might need to make that trade-off more in the way when we're first building it in developer
productivity. And then as we're maintaining it, maybe we go more towards the efficiency side.
But if you don't think about some of the efficiency things up front, you can end up in a bad spot
because you can get some technical debt. You could end up in a situation where it's hard to undo
some of the algorithmic mistakes that you made early on and the system starts to depend on.
So you should think about it at least a little bit.
Yeah, absolutely. And I think you're talking about they've got to squeeze out that little
extra bit of performance because they want high frame rates they might have to squeeze out that
little bit extra performance because it's either possible or not possible you know you look at some
of the stuff in the unreal engine these days you're like that's real time that's the game
that looks like a rendered cgi movie not a game yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and i mean so a lot of it
is being done for us today by library authors right so library authors are thinking about a
lot of the low-level stuff. So us as like run-of-the-mill developers don't need to, which is
great. But if you're doing something really de novo, something, you know, with an innovative
algorithm, you still need to consider efficiency at least. Right. And the other thing is it,
you can write really slow code in C and you can write really fast code in Python or vice versa.
It's easier to make it slow in Python, to be fair. But algorithms and data structures are
tremendous influences, right? If you're using, you should have been using a set or a dictionary and
you're using a list. Yeah. You're probably having a real bad time performance. And you caught me
multiple times on the technical review in places where I should have used a set and I used a list.
So thank you for that. But, but that's absolutely, that's a great example. I mean,
just knowing that, that basic fact that, you know, in this situation, just swapping out,
which is a simple switch, by the way, you know, one data structure for another can totally change
performance characteristics. That's the type of things you do learn in the CS degree that you
don't necessarily learn when you're a self-taught programmer kind of hacking everything out on your
own, which is why a book like classic computer science problems in Python, or maybe computer
science from scratch is good for that. Yeah. It exposes you to this. Here's a data structure you
haven't thought about, but here's why we're using it and the advantages and stuff. Yeah, absolutely.
Well, we've covered a lot. We've covered pretty much solved computer science in 2025. That's good.
And then the book is bringing computer science to so many people who are self-taught, you know, like me.
I went to college, but I studied many, many years of math and found my way into programming.
So I took a few CS programs, but not so many.
So, you know, it certainly showed me many things that I hadn't seen.
Like I've never emulated hardware before, for example.
That was wild.
And, you know, Michael, I was reading in Talk Python in production that you actually worked on Windows desktop apps.
Is that right?
I did.
Yeah, for 10 years, more than 10 years.
I'm almost 15 years, yeah.
Wow, so I'm curious,
how did you feel about that experience
versus the kind of Python GUI frameworks
that exist today?
You heard my rant about Visual Basic.
Yeah, and I was thinking of that.
I started actually in C++,
starting the hard way, doing MFC.
I don't know if you ever played with that or heard of that.
Yeah, Microsoft Foundation classes.
Yeah, yeah, and that was actually pretty decent
for a C++ framework.
And then as soon as I found Visual Basic and C#, I'm like, this is so much better.
It goes from weeks to days of UI work, you know, and stuff like that.
And it took me a while to really appreciate building for the web.
You know, I think I probably made that switch around the year 2000.
There's a little bit after that, but I really like the web these days.
I think the web is special.
I just wish it was easier to take apps from the web and get them to people.
For example, Firefox canceled progressive web apps.
iOS has them, but they're kind of, let's not talk about those.
And if you know the secret, you can probably install one, but you probably shouldn't.
And we're going to, you know, like if it's just, it's like right on the verge of one more
step and the web would be really, a really good replacement for those.
And now we have things like Electron and so on, which I'm not a huge fan of, but it's,
it's kind of what we need to make that happen, but we don't necessarily need Electron, right?
It would be really great.
I'm also really excited.
I don't know how you feel about, I'm really excited about PyScript.
and the possibility of running Python
for your front-end stuff?
Well, I guess what I was getting at is
why do you think Python has not taken off more
for desktop GUI development?
So like we've seen things like KIVI,
of course we have PyQT and several other frameworks
that wrap into older C++ GUI frameworks.
But like Python now is so mature,
it's the most popular language in the world.
There's nothing preventing it.
Yeah, there's nothing preventing it
from making a really nice platform
for native app development, right?
Fundamentally, you could wrap,
you could come up with a framework
that abstracts talking to Objective-C,
the APIs there, or the Win32 API.
You know, one of the things I'm starting to realize
that makes desktop development really different
from back in the day, if you will,
is there are so many gatekeepers and barriers
to getting your app onto a machine, right?
If I built a cool desktop app and I gave it to you,
your Mac would go, no,
we're not running that. We moved it to the trash for you because it wasn't notarized.
Right. And something similar happens on Windows. And so there's these steps you got to jump through.
And I think there's just been too many gotchas and steps for anybody to push a framework or a way of
doing this all the way through. I mean, in a sense, the web is kind of like good enough that we don't
have to figure out a way to build this. I think honestly, if I were to be more concerned, I'd be
more concerned that we can't create truly straightforward mobile apps with Python than
desktop apps. Yeah. What do you think? That's where I was going to go to next. Yeah. And I mean,
Kivy has been an attempt at that. But, you know, I don't really think it's gotten a ton of track
from what I see. It doesn't look like it's gotten a ton of traction in the way people in the Python
community hoped it would. So, you know, I don't have to do good work, but it's also not there yet.
I don't think. I wonder if some of the performance issues, you know, are part of this. So, you know,
people expect one of the reasons we like desktop apps and native mobile apps over web apps is
because we get instantaneous feedback and, you know, really high performance in our user interfaces.
And, you know, I still find even a PyQT app sometimes a little bit slower than, you know,
a regular QT app. And, you know, it's unfortunate. For me, like the big want for the whole Python
ecosystem is what started to be the focus, I think, of the core developers, which is performance
improvements. Like, I think that performance improvements would make everyone's lives in the
ecosystem so much better, you know. And so I think rightly that this has become like one of the central
focuses of, you know, of the core developers. Yeah. Guido, Mark Shannon, Grant Booker,
a bunch of people whose names I'm not including, they've all done really good work over the last
three or four years. I was a little bit sad to see Microsoft cancel that project or cancel the
funding for that project. I mean, the project continues, but still, you know, what has happened
is so, so much better. That is really a big deal. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, I even saw it in the
course of writing the book. I started writing the book in 2021 and that NES emulator on the same
was something like 12 frames per second in 2021.
And by 2025, it was like 17 frames
or 15 or 17 frames per second.
Yeah, nice.
I really saw it in these computationally intensive
programs in the book.
I'm pretty positive for it.
I mean, there's a lot of things that could be better,
but I think one of the real superpowers is
it's approachable, but it's ceiling of Python.
That is, it's ceiling of what you can accomplish
is not that low, right?
You can go pretty far if you have CS skills and ideas.
And then, you know, pip install, uv install.
The options of what is out there to just build and click together are incredible.
What do you think about, and I know you talked about it on the show before.
I heard about a while ago on the show about Mojo and about, you know, a total attempt
that, you know, let's just redo it and we'll get to keep the language syntax, but not the
runtime.
Right, right, right.
And I mean, PyPy is also, of course, kind of an attempt at that as well.
But and some people call for it, right?
I see sometimes people are like, why don't they replace CPython with PyPy?
What do you think about kind of just like the whole is too big a topic for the end?
No, no, it's interesting.
I think all of those are interesting.
I think the Mojo performance story is very powerful.
It's also really hard to bring over to CPython because there's so many different ways that it's used.
There's so many, you know, it runs on this piece of hardware doing this thing that we just could never optimize for, you know?
So, and then, like I said, with 600,000 or whatever there are packages, you know, how much of that are you willing to carve away to get a faster language?
And what I think also is a really interesting aspect that people might not think about or take into account that often is you'll see a lot of these benchmarks.
Like here's the three body, solving the three body problem in Python, and here's solving it in Mojo.
Here's solving the three-body problem in Rust.
And look at that huge difference.
But what often happens in Python
is you find yourself orchestrating native code anyway.
Like, okay, we're going to use Polars
and we're going to do this thing.
But when I call the Polars functions,
I'm no longer running Python.
I'm running like a drop of Python and a bunch of Rust.
And then you write back in the same,
or I'm talking to a database layer,
or my web app is running on a Rust-based server.
There's just all these little parts
where a lot of times your code speed
is more about how you're putting the pieces together.
Yeah.
Not always.
If you're doing computational stuff,
that's out the window potentially.
But when you're kind of, you know,
you do machine learning, you're doing web apps,
you're doing database calls.
A lot of these are like just a layer
and then off it goes.
Yeah, that's totally makes sense.
But then I think it is holding Python back
from some of those, you know,
some of these real interesting domains
that people want to get into,
especially when they're first learning programming,
like 3D games.
Let's stick with that
because I'm thinking of ones for people
in computer science education.
A lot of people who study computer science
is because they want to make a game, right?
Sure.
And when they want to make a game-
And I can see a world,
like look at one of the biggest game companies
in the world, it's Unity.
Yeah.
Right?
As a foundational,
like building your game with not creator of games.
They're built, I believe in C-sharp and.net,
if I remember correctly.
And that's a faster language, but it's not raging fast.
You know, it's a lot faster, but it's still a decent way from a C,
like a pure C language, right?
Yeah.
A pure C implementation.
And they're really, really successful.
They got close enough.
I could easily see some company go, we're going to build a game engine.
We're going to use Python as the language to get as many people
who have been left out in the cold, in a sense, to do it.
but we're going to do a mojo-like thing.
Or we're going to do something where
you don't get to use every library,
but do you really need Flask in your game?
Not in your game.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
We're going to build like a smaller focused,
high performance version
that looks as close as it could be.
And we're going to sell you a game engine
in a way to ship those games on Steam,
a way to ship those games on Metal to macOS, et cetera.
Right?
Like I could see that world happen.
Yeah, yeah.
I don't see me making that world,
but I could see that happen.
And then actually, I think it would be okay.
How do you feel?
Like, do you see that as possible?
No, that makes total sense.
I think another thing we think about is like,
how much are skills becoming more transferable
because of LLMs?
So can somebody who already learned Python well
now quickly pick up C# in Unity
because the LLM is doing a lot of the detailed syntax for them
and they just have to understand the programmatic ideas.
So is like, you know, maybe Python will continue
to always be this great first language for everybody.
And it'll be easier for people to now transition
to other languages for specific domains.
And so it matters less that we have everything
in the original language.
Okay, out in the chat,
there's the recommendation for, that's GoDot.
If you want to go, I'm not super familiar with it.
I think it's an open source game engine.
Yes, that much I know,
but that's where my knowledge stops.
Right, and I think it has like,
it's like a Godot script or something or G script or something is it's it's language which I think
has more of a Python like syntax somebody in the chat can correct me yeah interesting okay but I
I think if you took an end-to-end thing you know it's not just a matter of like you can run the
game engine with this you've got to take it all the way to here's how you ship your games because
soon what is the very first thing you want to do once you get your game working and fun you want
to show your friends you know what I mean and you've got to find a way to send it out so this
goes back to what you were talking about earlier is all the hurdles around you know getting something
on the mac app store steam or you know or whatever um and how and that goes also to another big thing
that we're trying to solve in the python ecosystem which is the packaging story right um which there
are many solutions for but just not one decided on let's make this the standard like you know as
easy as possible thing yeah it's getting better things are definitely getting better but it's still
there is no Python build --format equals EXE.
Right.
You know, where, where, what comes out and then some sort of tooling that automatically
signs that stuff with your certificate you've got as a windows developer.
So it doesn't get flags as malware.
There's just, even if you get the thing to build, there's like these three or four other
steps, you know, I'm thinking about an iOS.
It's like, okay, we got it to run Python, but, but really what we needed to do is like
integrate with Swift UI and have storyboards where I can like, I can weave it. And you're like,
well, that's no, that's a long ways away. Like I know, but that's, you got to go through those
stages to get it. I don't know. It's just, there's, there's a little bit, a little bit further to go,
I guess, but I would love to see it. And I'm, I think it'll happen probably.
It's not that you can't do it. It's just, there's too much friction right now.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, hopefully you've given some people some ideas. Somebody's going to go
start the unity the pie unity company or whatever and let's let's let's make it happen
yeah yeah oh and also just um real-time follow-up out there godo is apparently the pronunciation
it's french sorry okay no no i didn't know it either um i think honestly just shout out to
everyone if you have a weird name for your project on github put an mp3 and say this is how you say
it just get it let's let's help us out and not that french is weird but just you know we should
actually do that with english projects too right um yeah yeah absolutely to make them accessible to
the yeah as simple yeah it has nothing to do with french i'm thinking even as something simple as
g unicorn is often said gunicorn and half the people out there are probably thinking michael
you're wrong it's gunicorn not unicorn but their logo is a green unicorn yeah i'm like well it's
probably the g stand just g and then certainly the unicorn part is probably unicorn because
unicorn is you know what i mean but like it's totally reasonable to look at it and go unicorn
you know what i mean but if they just put a little mp3 like it's or even just where it's pronounced
g ee dash unicorn you know what i mean yeah yeah i think we all need to do that yeah yeah all right
well the chat is getting lively but we're gonna have to call it because we might be just a tiny
bit over time and it's getting late and you're part of the world so well thank you so much for
having me on again, Michael. It was really a pleasure. Congratulations again on Talk Python
in production. Thank you. And Computer Science from Scratch as well.
Yeah. And if folks want to check out the book, there's a website that
I'm sure you'll put in the show notes, computersciencefromscratch.com.
And you can just learn more about the different projects we do and some of the
ideas in the book. Yeah. Awesome. People want to get in touch with you
otherwise? How do they do that? Sure. You can find me on X, I guess,
at Dave Kopech, D-A-V-E-K-O-P-E-C.
And if you go to my website, DaveKopech.com,
there's a bunch, there's email
and a bunch of other ways to contact me.
So D-A-V-E-K-O-P-E-C.com.
Yeah, I'll put it in the show notes.
Thanks, Michael.
Yeah, you bet, you bet.
So David, thanks for being back on the show.
It's been really fun.
Yeah, we'll talk to you later.
Awesome, thanks, Michael.
See ya.
This has been another episode of Talk Python To Me.
Thank you to our sponsors.
Be sure to check out what they're offering.
It really helps support the show.
This episode is brought to you by Sentry.
Don't let those errors go unnoticed.
Use Sentry like we do here at Talk Python.
Sign up at talkpython.fm/sentry.
And it's brought to you by NordStellar.
NordStellar is a threat exposure management platform
from the Nord security family,
the folks behind NordVPN,
that combines dark web intelligence,
session hijacking prevention,
brand and domain abuse detection,
and external attack surface management.
Learn more and get started keeping your team safe
at talkpython.fm/nordstellar.
If you or your team needs to learn Python,
we have over 270 hours of beginner and advanced courses
on topics ranging from complete beginners
to async code, Flask, Django, HTML, and even LLMs.
Best of all, there's no subscription in sight.
Browse the catalog at talkpython.fm.
And if you're not already subscribed to the show
on your favorite podcast player,
what are you waiting for?
Just search for Python in your podcast player.
We should be right at the top.
If you enjoyed that geeky rap song, you can download the full track.
The link is actually in your podcast blog or share notes.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Thank you so much for listening.
I really appreciate it.
I'll see you next time.
And we ready to roll
Upgrading the code
No fear of getting old
We tapped into that modern vibe
Overcame each storm
Talk Python To Me
I sync is the norm